Extend Test Module Documentation & Explain Python integration (#5333)
os-autoinst/openQA: docs/WritingTests.asciidoc

[[writingtests]]

> = openQA test module developer guide

Reviewer: You're right. There's no need to be over-specific here.

   SUT.
* *no_rollback*: Don't roll back to the 'lastgood' snapshot of the SUT if the
   test module fails.
* *always_rollback*: Roll back to the 'lastgood' snapshot of the SUT even if
   test was successful.

See the example below for how to enable a test flag. Note that snapshots are
only supported by the QEMU backend. When using other backends `fatal` is
therefore enabled by default. One can explicitly set it to `0` to disable the
behavior for all backends even though it is not possible to roll back.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
sub test_flags () {
    return {fatal => 1};
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== `pre_run_hook`

It is called before the run function - mainly useful for a whole group of tests.
It is useful to setup the start point of the test.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
sub pre_run_hook () {
    # Make sure to begin the test in the root console.
    select_console 'root-console';
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== `post_fail_hook`

> It is called only when the test execution failed, it is useful to upload log files
> or determine the state of the machine.

Reviewer: In accordance with my other suggestion:
```suggestion
It is called after `run()` failed. It is useful to upload log files
or to determine the state of the machine.
```
Maybe also go over the other similar sections and try to streamline them.

It's useful to setup the start point of the test.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
sub pre_run_hook {
    # Make sure to begin the test in the root console.
    select_console 'root-console';
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== `post_fail_hook`

Is called only when the test execution failed, it's useful to upload log files
or determine the state of the machine.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
sub post_fail_hook {
    # Take an screenshot when the test failed
    save_screenshot;
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== `post_run_hook`

Is run after successful run function, it will be executed regardless of the
result of the test run.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
sub post_fail_hook {
    send_key 'ctrl-alt-f3';

    assert_script_run 'openqa-cli api experimental/search q=shutdown.pm' ;    
}
-------------------------------------------------------------------

=== Example Perl Test Modules

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Author: Hm, I switched the lines for the `[id=` and the `===` and didn't affect at all the id generation. it marks the h3 with that ID regardless of the position.

Also the headers above do it like that too.

What do you mean by "following a reference"?

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Reviewer: > Also the headers above do it like that too.

We're trying to improve the documentation for years but it isn't perfect yet.

> What do you mean by "following a reference"?

Clicking on an internal cross reference within the document or following a URL with hash like https://open.qa/docs/#snapshots. Just have a look at this URL. When loading this page you'll end up below the actual heading. It would be much nicer if the heading was still visible which is achieved by moving the ID before the heading. Of course one could also just use the auto-generated ID (and only that is the ID that marks the h3 element, see e.g. https://open.qa/docs/#_using_snapshots_to_speed_up_development_of_tests).

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Author: Huh, I see now.

It looks like a deeper problem with the CSS Layout, normally the referred id should be the first item in the viewport. I don't quite know rn how to improve it without going way off-track with CSS changes or adding workarounds in the asciidocs.

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Reviewer: > normally the referred id should be the first item in the viewport.

It should be but that's also not the problem here. If you use the `[id="…"]` you'll get the ID on the next paragraph. So the paragraph ends up as the first item in the viewport and not the heading. Maybe the HTML generator behaves not like that in all cases (e.g. when the element after the heading is no paragraph but something else) but it makes still generally sense to put the ID before the heading.

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Reviewer: I guess if you wanted to change the ID of the heading element itself then you would write it like this:

```
[[usersguide]]
= openQA users guide
```

> [id="testmodule_perl_examples"]

Author: > It should be but that's also not the problem here. If you use the [id="…"] you'll get the ID on the next paragraph.

Just checked this, and it doesn't render like that. IIUC this:

```asciidoc
=== Example Perl Test Modules
[id="testmodule_perl_examples"]
```

is expected to render:

```html
<!-- [...] -->
<h3>Example Perl test modules</h3>
<!-- the next element in line has the ID -->
<div id="_example_perl_test_modules"> class="paragraph">
<!-- [...] -->
```

But it actually renders:

```html
<!-- [...] -->
<h3 id="_example_perl_test_modules">Example Perl test modules</h3>
<div id="testmodule_perl_examples" class="paragraph">
<!-- [...] -->
```

HTML seems to be rendered correctly with `[id=...]` below the heading.

== Basic
[id="basic"]

This section explains the basic layout of openQA test modules and the API

> available. Test modules are written in the *Perl* programming language.

Reviewer 2: If so, that might also needed then to be extended to also consider python, either you live enough to become generic, or you die a specialized document.

> available. Test modules are written in the *Perl* programming language.

Author: Addressed in 835fe9e91

However there is support for the *Python* programming language (through the Perl module
`Inline::Python`).

This document assumes that the reader is already familiar with Perl or Python.

> == Test module API

Reviewer 2: Lets keep it as `Test API`, seldomly we refer to it as the "test module api".

> == Test module API

Reviewer: Yes, "Test API" is really more in-line with how people generally name it.

[id="api"]
:testapi: https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst/blob/master/testapi.pm[os-autoinst]

{testapi} provides the API for the test modules using the os-autoinst backend.
Take a look at the http://open.qa/api/testapi[test API documentation] for further
information. Note that this test API is sometimes also referred to as an
openQA DSL, because in some contexts it can look like a domain specific
language.

=== Notes on the Python API
[id="notes-python-api"]

The Python integration that OpenQA offers through `Inline::Python` also allows

> the test modules to import other Perl modules with the usage of the `perl`

Reviewer 3: This whole block should be much further below. First a basic example should be featured as we had in before, only much later you should add this note

Author: Agreed, I didn't quite feel a good place for it, but wanted the notes to be somewhere close. I'll move it down the first basic explanation, maybe there makes more sense.

def run():
    perl.require('x11utils')

    # Start vncviewer - notice the named arguments passed as positional arguments
    # Formatted in pairs for better visibility.

    perl.x11utils.x11_start_program('vncviewer :0',
        'target_match', 'virtman-gnome_virt-install',
        'match_timeout', 100
    )
    # [...] omitted for brevity
-------------------------------------------------------------------

== How to write test modules

=== Test module interface
[caption="Example: "]
.Note: symbols marked with `*1` are optional. They are no-ops when not present.

All openQA tests need to comply with the following interface (loosely defined in
type-hinted python terms for the sake of explicitness):

[source,python]
-------------------------------------------------------------------
def run(): -> None
def test_flags(): -> dict # *1
def post_fail_hook(): -> None # *1
def pre_run_hook(): -> None # *1
def post_run_hook(): -> None # *1
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== `run`
Defines the actual steps to be performed during the module execution.

An example usage:

[source,perl]
-------------------------------------------------------------------

> sub run() {

Reviewer 3: I don't understand your change here. First you explain the interface that python test modules must implement and then the perl run method is shown as example? Also the python test modules do *not* need to implement those functions, only `run` is required. For the rest the baseclass already provide implementations

Author: The desire is to layout the complete interface of a test module in a language/dialect/markup that allows to indicate: signatures & return types.

The interface is not "defined" in python per se, but rather explained in type-hinted python terms (so we can get signatures & return types) on what's actually required for the test.

I could layout the base class and what can be overwritten there. But there's no "class" in the actual test module, or is it? (I still get lost in perl, please correct me if my assumption is wrong)

Reviewer 3: > But there's no "class" in the actual test module, or is it?

There is, https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst/blob/master/basetest.pm

Reviewer 2: > > But there's no "class" in the actual test module, or is it?
> 
> There is, https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst/blob/master/basetest.pm

Basetest is a poor example, as it is tightly coupled with code that should be on the backend baseclass, autotest or testapi (i.e, anything that calls query_isotovideo): https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst/blob/9a99cd728b32edc918b2d170e947eecd6638656d/basetest.pm#L624

Author: After a deep dive into understanding "classes" in perl. Any sub defined in [basetest.pm][basetest.pm] could potentially be overwritten by the test module and it's allowed.

[basetest.pm][basetest.pm] is an Abstract-ish Base "Class", a concrete "class" and the test context at the same time :sweat_smile:.

The thing is now that the way these classes are used is *very* perl, they can't be called classes in python because Python classes are a completely different beast.

Right now I can't think of another way to markup the signature of what's expected for a developer to provide in a test module that what's in the docs in 995dbad4f, but I'm open to anything neutral that indicates:

* Function/Subroutine Signature
* Return Types
* What symbols are optional

[basetest.pm]: https://github.com/os-autoinst/os-autoinst/blob/master/basetest.pm

Reviewer 3: Well, the issue I see right now is that your additions state that a test module would need to implement an interface. As a software designer I understand it and it's correct but the target audience are testers and QA engineers with little to no programming experience. Hence we should be careful to use mostly plain English even under the risk of not completely technically correct statements. Formerly the text stated something along the lines of "To write a test module just put a run-function and you are good". That's what I would like to keep.

Reviewer 2: >  As a software designer I understand it and it's correct but the target audience are testers and QA engineers with little to no programming experience.

This assumption is incorrect (and a bit condescending), I would be ok if `interface` links to a definition on I.E Wikipedia, while we build a glossary of terms that we can refer to later. Also something missing is to say that the only required method is the run method. I'd buy (barely) Perl, but not a general statement such as that

The target audience is QA Engineers, who regardless of their programming experience have decided to look into test automation using openQA.

Author: > Hence we should be careful to use mostly plain English even under the risk of not completely technically correct statements.

I think in this case we can keep both, check 8cd76802f.

Brought back the former writing focusing on `run` and elaborated below so it's clear that only a single function is needed.

    assert_screen "desktop", 300;
}

> sub test_flags() {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sub test_flag () {
```

    return {fatal => 1};
}

1;
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== Install software via `zypper`

> [id="testmodule_perl_zypper"]

Reviewer 3: I don't know why you changed that and, sorry, that does not make sense. Keep in mind that openQA is a generic product so not specific to SLE/openSUSE hence "zypper" is merely an example here, not something that is important to explain in the context of openQA

1;
-------------------------------------------------------------------

==== Install software via `zypper`
[id="testmodule_perl_zypper"]

[caption="Example: "]
.Console test that installs software from remote repository via zypper command

[source,perl]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> sub run {

Author: I don't mind bringing back the parentheses, I read the tests in distri opensuse and most of them didn't have the empty parentheses.

If there desired, I'll bring them back!

> sub run {

Reviewer 3: Please keep the parentheses. And tests in os-autoinst-distri-opensuse are often not following any consistent pattern nor modern standards. The immense value of os-autoinst-distri-opensuse is in what tests it provides, not the code quality.

> sub run {

Author: Addressed in ebe9a6f8b

> sub run {

Reviewer 4: Actually, the parentheses are superfluous.
A little background: Without activating the newer `signatures` feature, parentheses after subroutine names mean [prototypes](https://perldoc.perl.org/perlsub#Prototypes). An empty prototype means, this subroutine does not accept any argument.
However, object orientation was added to Perl later, and when calling a subroutine as a method (which we do for test modules), prototypes are ignored.
So I guess it's ok to keep the parentheses, but it would be more correct to remove them :)

    # capture a screenshot and compare with needle 'test-zypper_in'
    assert_screen 'test-zypper_in';
}

> 1;

Reviewer 3: Please leave this out. The example above is not a complete file content, just the implementation of one method

    # make sure kate was closed
    assert_screen 'desktop';
}

1;
--------------------------------------------------------------

=== Example Python Test Modules
[id="testmodule_python_examples"]

The following examples are short complete test modules written in Python
implementing the interface described above.

> ==== OpenQA Web UI Sample test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== openQA web UI sample test
```

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Author: They can be handy for bookmarking/hotlinking but no idea if there used or not.

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Reviewer 2: better to have something direct to bookmark

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Reviewer: It is not required for bookmarking as you'll get an auto-generated ID in any case (e.g. https://open.qa/docs/#_sending_new_lines_and_continuation_characters).

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Reviewer 2: > It is not required for bookmarking as you'll get an auto-generated ID in any case (e.g. https://open.qa/docs/#_sending_new_lines_and_continuation_characters).

i'd still prefer something intentional over autogenerated but it isn't the end of the world

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Reviewer: Right, if it is very important that the ID stays stable then you should keep the explicit ID. I guess that's what they're for. But then still place it before the heading.

> [id="testmodule_python_webui"]

Reviewer 2: > They do get used, but there's no agreement apparently.
> 
> see a sample of files having `#open.qa/docs#`
> 
> ```
> assets/javascripts/running.js
> container/helm/README.md
> docs/UsersGuide.asciidoc
> lib/OpenQA/CLI/api.pm
> lib/OpenQA/Schema/Result/Jobs.pm
> lib/OpenQA/WebAPI/Plugin/Helpers.pm
> ```
> 
> I don't have a strong opinion on keeping or removing. Adding them keeps the ID's stable (and in turn the bookmark) even if the title changes. Removing it means the links will vary with the title.

lets leave the follow ups for when we have a technical writer.

    # make sure kate was closed
    assert_screen 'desktop';
}

> 1;

Reviewer 3: see above

Author: Addressed in d5a519bab

}
--------------------------------------------------------------

=== Example Python test modules
[id="testmodule_python_examples"]

The following examples are short complete test modules written in Python
implementing the interface described above.

==== openQA web UI sample test
[id="testmodule_python_webui"]

[caption="Example: "]
.Test for the openQA web UI written in Python

[source,python]
--------------------------------------------------------------
from testapi import *

> def run():

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
def run(self):
```
Otherwise we'll get
```
TypeError: run() takes 0 positional arguments but 1 was given
```

Author: Changing it! 

just out of my own curiosity, can you:

```
def run(self):
  print(type(self), dir(self), self)
```

I wanna know how the self looks like :thinking:

    # use imported Perl-based libraries; call Perl function that would be called via "named arguments" in Perl
    # note: In Perl the call would have been: x11_start_program('flatpak run com.obsproject.Studio', target_match => 'obsproject-wizard')
    #
    # See the explanation in the "Notes on the Python API" section.
    perl.x11utils.x11_start_program('flatpak run com.obsproject.Studio', 'target_match', 'obsproject-wizard')

def switch_to_root_console():
    send_key('ctrl-alt-f3')

> def post_fail_hook():

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
def post_fail_hook(self):
```

    switch_to_root_console()
    assert_script_run('openqa-cli api experimental/search q=shutdown.pm')

> def test_flags():

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
def test_flags(self):
```

.Defining serial exception capture in the test
[source,perl]
--------------------------------------------------------------

> sub run() {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sub run () {
```

Author: Addressed in d5a519bab
